Post: How to speed up inference in your deep learning model (#117)
xmartlabs/blog: _posts/2020-05-20-how-to-speed-up-inference-in-your-deep-learning-model.md

date: 2020-05-18 10:00:00
author: Renzo Gambone
tags: [Xmartlabs, Deep Learning, Optimization]
category: machine-learning
author_id: renzo
featured_image: /images/automate-manual-testing/featured2.png
show: true
crosspost_to_medium: false

---

Did you obtain good accuracy with your deep learning model only to find out that inference time isn't enough to deploy on production? Are you lost on how to optimize your model's inference speed? Then this post is for you.

<div style="text-align: center"><img width="100%" src="/images/automate-manual-testing/featured2.png" /></div>

Data Science projects have the peculiarity that your focus must constantly shift across completely different requirements.

- How will you obtain the data? Are you creating the dataset? (if so what exactly should you label? how many samples should you invest in?)
- How will you make use of the model? A model is nice and fine, but how do you make a product that adds value to the user?
- What model will you implement? There are many scientific papers out there, and often from the time you begin research until you are in the middle of implementation, the state of the art has already changed.

> - But the most important question of all. Is all this viable? Can a model be trained using the data your budget allows? Will it perform sufficiently good for the use we intend the model to?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- But the most important question of all. Is all of this viable? Can a model be trained using the data your budget allows? Will it perform sufficiently good for the use case we intend to apply it to?
```

The first step on optimizing our model runtime is to make the most out of our model's architecture. 

### Post-training quantization

Converting the model's weights from floating point (32-bits) to integers (8-bits) will degrade accuracy, but it significantly decreases model size in memory, while also improving CPU and hardware accelerator latency.

**Our experience**

When we tried to quantize a PyTorch [Faster R-CNN](https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497) model we, unfortunately, run into multiple issues.

At the time of writing this article, PyTorch doesn't natively support model quantization for GPUs [as TensorFlow does](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/quantization/quantize).

So in order to quantize a PyTorch model, we must run it on [NVIDIA TensorRT](https://developer.nvidia.com/tensorrt), but for running it in TensorRT runtime we must convert our PyTorch model.
As of now, the only way to achieve this conversion is to first convert our PyTorch model to [ONNX](https://github.com/onnx/onnx), and then convert it to TensorRT.

On paper, all this makes sense and should be easy enough to do.
However, in practice issues may occur from all these conversions.

> This is mainly due to the fact that the development of PyTorch, ONNX, and TensorRT goes in different ways. 

Reviewer: What does this sentence mean? That the three types of models are incompatible? It's not immediately clear to me what "development" means in this context.

Author: It refers to the development of the frameworks (each company goes in different directions).
Maybe:
```suggestion
This is mainly due to the fact that the development of PyTorch, ONNX, and TensorRT goes in multiple directions when a feature is added into one an old integration won't necessarily support it. 
```

- You may be able to run the model on ONNX, but [issues may occur when converting ONNX to TensorRT](https://github.com/onnx/onnx-tensorrt/issues/302), especially with some layers, [such as the Resize layer in PyTorch](https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT/issues/284).
- At the time we tried to do this conversion, it happened to us that [models built with PyTorch v1.3 or higher can be converted and run in ONNX Runtime, but can't be run through the ONNX optimizer](https://github.com/onnx/onnx/issues/2417) (which makes important improvements in the converted network).

Some users have managed to solve their issues during conversion by downgrading PyTorch.
However, this limits the ONNX `opset` you can access, which in turn also limits what TensorRT version will you be able to run your engine with.

Hopefully, all these issues will be solved in the near future...

> But considering that all these frameworks have high development speed it's likely that there always be short time incompatibilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But considering that all these frameworks have high development speed it's likely that there will always be short-lived incompatibility periods.
```

Post-training quantization is definitely a powerful tool, and although we experienced issues when quantizing a PyTorch [Faster R-CNN](https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497) model, you should still give it a shot, considering that after exporting your model to ONNX it doesn't take much effort trying to convert it via command line using `trtexec`, which is readily available along with TensorRT in [Nvidia TensorRT docker container](https://ngc.nvidia.com/catalog/containers/nvidia:tensorrt).
If this still doesn't work then we'd advise on looking for a TensorFlow implementation if quantization is still an approach you want to go for.

---

### Converting the model to half-precision

In a similar fashion to the previous approach, this alternative aims to trade-off accuracy for speed and memory efficiency.
It offers a middle point between FP32 and UInt8, where:

- The model size is reduced by up to half (instead of by up to 75%)

> - The difference of accuracy is negligible compared to FP32, this means not sacrificing as much accuracy as when applying model quantization.

Reviewer: This sounds like quite the statement to me. Is there general evidence of this? I'd expect a link to one or more information sources that support this claim. I would phrase it differently: `We have experienced a negligible accuracy reduction in our experiments` or something similar.

Author: I'll rewrite and add some difference to fully converting to fp16 and doing automatic mixed precision

This means that we can find an even better trade-off by using half-precision only in the layers that need a speed boost (such as convolutions) and leave the rest in FP32.
Having layers in FP32 not only increments precision in some operations but also prevents gradient underflow (small gradient values becoming zeroes).

This approach is called [Automatic Mixed Precision](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.03740), and it differs on quantization in that rather than post-processing the weights of a trained model, the model should be trained, using mixed precision from the get-go.

**Our experience**

TensorFlow once again goes great extents to make our lives easier by [giving us native support to achieve this](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/train/experimental/enable_mixed_precision_graph_rewrite).
Whereas if you're using PyTorch, [NVIDIA Apex](https://github.com/NVIDIA/apex) is the tool you should use, which fortunately according to our experiences has way fewer issues than the pain that is doing quantization with a PyTorch model.

Integrating Apex is advertised as a mere addition of three lines to your code.
And actually, it is not much more than that.

> You must initialize it, change the backward pass call to use Apex's scaled loss, and modify the way you save and load checkpoints.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to have a code snippet here? Or is the documentation really clear?

Author: We discussed it and it didn't add that much, considering the apex documentation is clear enough. But we could revisit the idea @mats-claassen, what do you think?

Reviewer 2: The doc is very clear, but as it is only 4 lines we could add it here

Knowledge Distillation proposes to train a smaller model with fewer parameters by using our big model as trainer.
This essentially trains our small model to output the same predictions as our big model or ensemble.

A great advantage of this is that we aren't restricted to only using labelled data.
Beware though that our accuracy might suffer a bit, but we should be able to get a decent speed improvement out of it.

We, unfortunately, didn't have the pleasure of implementing this approach ourselves.
But  Knowledge distillation has got quite popular recently and has been used in object classification, object detection, acoustic models, and NLP, among others.

If you want to know more about knowledge distillation check out this paper by [Geoffrey Hinton et al](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1503.02531.pdf).

---

## To sum up

In this blog, we've described five approaches to improve the inference time of your deep learning model.
In particular, we'd advise you to implement them in the order we also listed them in, because any coding we do to implement model quantization and automatic mixed-precision is of great value to any further changes we make on our model.

> We hope that this article was of value to you, either by giving you guidance on an issue you're currently facing or by arming you with our knowledge should the need arise for it!

Reviewer: I would love a table here comparing the five approaches in accuracy, speed and coding difficulty.

Author: Not so sure if we are able to provide such a thing.

The first two approaches can either solve your issue (if it needs only a small push) or add value to the following approaches.

The increment in accuracy and speed will vary on your problems and the models you use. Maybe you were already using the best model for your use case. In a similar way, the coding difficulty could be from almost none (if you found an open-source that implements a model) to a lot if you have to do it yourself...

Regarding the 5th approach, we didn't implement it, so we can't exactly know the difficulties there, aside from the fact that you would need to first have a really accurate model (or reuse previous trained model as an ensemble)

Author: @mats-claassen do you think there is more insight we can add regarding that end?

Reviewer 2: There are no numbers we could give for that comparison. It heavily depends on the model and the idea of the blog is to be generic in that aspect, right? What could be done is a table with String values like 'High', 'Medium', 'Low'. So we could say accuracy 'Slightly decreases', speed 'Faster', coding difficulty 'Medium'. But without numbers I think the usefulness of that is limited. What do you think?

Author: I don't see much value in it.
If those cases don't apply to most general cases then the information will be mostly not applicable.
My idea was that the article should convey to the viewer what are the difficulties and possible benefits of applying an approach to a case they have in mind.

Author: Like with quantization and AMP the strengths and difficulties are clear. However, with changes in the model it heavily depends on:
- The implementation's reusability
- If they already implemented the best model in theory for their use case
